# `merkle`: a Merkle tree manipulation library

A small but usable implementation of Merkle trees, generic over digest algorithm
with some low-hanging performance optimizations.

## Build

`cargo build` will do the trick.

All public API is documented; `cargo doc` to build it.

## Test

`cargo test` will run unit, integration, and property tests.

## Benchmark

`cargo bench` will run [Criterion](https://criterion-rs.github.io/book/)
benchmarks for the public API on a range of input sizes.

## Example usage

```rust
use merkle::Tree;
use sha2::Sha256;

// Build a tree from byte-like items.
let tree: Tree<Sha256> = ["alpha", "beta", "gamma"].into_iter().collect();

// Generate and verify a proof for a leaf.
let proof = tree.prove(1).unwrap();
let valid = proof.preproof.verify().unwrap();
```

`Preproof` also supports the `serde::{Serialize, Deserialize}` traits, so can be
used to transfer Merkle proofs as e.g. JSON.

## Design decisions

### Hashing

The tree is generic over its digest algorithm using
[`digest::Digest`](https://docs.rs/digest/latest/digest/trait.Digest.html), a
trait that collects cryptographically secure digest algorithms.

### Layout

The tree is stored internally in a flat tree using the Eytzinger breadth-first
implicit tree layout, which is memory-compact and cache-friendly, and allows us
to access contiguous slices of leaves and sibling nodes, which is particularly
helpful when recalculating the tree.

### Code structure

Two concerns are separated: the internal module `tree` deals with the implicit
tree representation and manipulation, while cryptographic applications are
represented in the top-level `lib.rs`.

### Odd leaf handling

Odd leaves are promoted to leaves on the level above, which is natural for the
layout, though incompatible with some other Merkle tree implementations. This
means that all Merkle trees generated by this library are complete and perfect,
though not necessarily full.

### Empty tree handling

Trees need not have items. A tree without any items will yield `None` from its
`root()` function, and an attempt to generate a proof at any index will always
result in `Error::IndexOutOfBounds`.

## AI tool usage

All library code was written by hand. Test and benchmark code was largely
generated from natural language and kept up-to-date using Claude Code (via
[Zed](https://zed.dev)), and documentation (excluding this `README`, which is
artisanal) was partly hand-written and partly generated (I wrote terse
documentation of surprising or non-local facts and used Claude to expand it,
then passed over it myself to check for correctness and improve phrasing and
formatting).
